as “one of Japan’s foremost political scientists and a leading pre-war 
liberal.” 

31. Ogata, op. cit., p. 132. 

32. Ibid., p. 124. Cf. also p. 1S5. 

33. Crowley, op. cit., p. 138. It should be added that among the 
complex roots of fascism in Japan was a great concern for the suffer¬ 
ing of the poor farmers, particularly after the great depression struck. 
See Maruyama, op. cit., pp. 44-45, for some relevant quotations and 
comments. 

34. Ogata, op. cit., p. 45, paraphrasing a Kwantung Army research 
report. 

35. Ibid., p. 42. 

36. Royama, op. cit., p. 11. 

37. Comparisons are difficult, but it seems that the Japanese were 
considerably more successful in establishing a functioning puppet gov¬ 
ernment in Manchuria than the United States has ever been in Viet¬ 
nam, just as the Germans were more successful in converting French 
nationalist forces to their ends in occupied and Vichy France than the 
United States has been in Vietnam. On the insurgency that developed 
in Manchuria, and the Japanese attempts to suppress it, see below, 
pages 195-201. 

38. Quotes and paraphrase from Owen Lattimore, “China and the 
Barbarians,” in Joseph Barnes, ed., Empire in the East (Garden City, 
N.Y., Doubleday, Doran & Company, Inc., 1934), pp. 3-36. 

39. Op. cit. See note 19. 

40. Op. cit., p. 95. 

41. In addition, there were those who opposed any compromise or 
concession on the grounds that it would then be impossible “to face 
the myriad spirits of the war dead” (General Matsui, 1941, cited by 
Maruyama, op. cit., p. 113). It is painful to contemplate the question 
of how many have died, throughout history, so that others shall not 
have died in vain. 


213 


^ - AMERICAN POWER AND THE NEW MANDARINS 

