73 


-• AMERICAN POWER AND THE NEW MANDARINS 

argued, could solve the thousand problems of social reconstruc¬ 
tion and produce the spiritual transformation that is the essence 
of a true social revolution. As Bolshevik practice hardened into 
dogma, the fear of popular initiative and spontaneous mass 
action, not under the direction and control of the properly des¬ 
ignated vanguard, became a dominant element of so-called 
“Communist” ideology. 

Antagonism to mass movements and to social change that 
escapes the control of privileged elites is also a prominent fea¬ 
ture of contemporary liberal ideology. 53 Expressed as foreign 
policy, it takes the form described earlier. To conclude this 
discussion of counterrevolutionary subordination, I would like 
to investigate how, in one rather crucial case, this particular 
bias in American liberal ideology can be detected even in the 
interpretation of events of the past in which American involve¬ 
ment was rather slight, and in historical work of very high 
caliber. 

In 1966, the American Historical Association gave its biennial 
award for the most outstanding work on European history to 
Gabriel Jackson, for his study of Spain in the 1930s. 54 There is 
no question that of the dozens of books on this period, Jackson’s 
is among the best, and I do not doubt that the award was well 
deserved. The Spanish Civil War is one of the crucial events of 
modern history, and one of the most extensively studied as well. 
In it, we find the interplay of forces and ideas that have domin¬ 
ated European history since the industrial revolution. What is 
more, the relationship of Spain to the great powers was in many 
respects like that of the countries of what is now called the 
Third World. In some ways, then, the events of the Spanish 
Civil War give a foretaste of what the future may hold, as Third 
World revolutions uproot traditional societies, threaten imperial 
dominance, exacerbate great-power rivalries, and bring the world 


74 


Objectivity and Liberal Scholarship 


perilously close to a war which, if not averted, will surely be the 
final catastrophe of modern history. My reason for wanting to 
investigate an outstanding liberal analysis of the Spanish Civil 
