What is the situation that American policy makers face in 
mid-1967?The American military takeover of “pacification” is a 
testimony to the failure, thus far, of the effort to impose a 
political solution by force on an unwilling population.Its true 
significance is tersely indicated by an unnamed American offi¬ 
cial in Saigon who comments: “We’ve been playing the be-nice- 
to-the-Asian game for ten years, and it’s been a flop.We can’t 
afford it any longer.” 5 The American chief of civil operations in 
the northernmost provinces attributes the failure of the “revolu¬ 
tionary development teams” to the “overwhelming corruption” 
of Vietnamese official life, to the failure to understand that 
“until there is a contented peasantry there is no room for the 
opulent society of the government of Vietnam.” 6 The same re¬ 
port in the Times goes on to give a dramatic example of the 
results of this corruption.It comments on the successful attack 
by a guerrilla force on the province capital of Quang Tri on 
April 6, and continues: “A few days later, in a series of events 
that were not fully reported at the time, [the guerrillas] moved 
virtually unmolested into Hue while the army and the national 
police fled”—a remarkable event, its significance indicated by 
the fact that it was kept from the American people at the time 
and still has not been frankly discussed.