“At a 
broad, conceptual level, the main concern of counterinsurgency 
efforts should be to influence the behavior of the population 
rather than their loyalties and attitudes”; “the primary consider¬ 
ation should be whether the proposed measure is likely to in¬ 
crease the cost and difficulties of insurgent operations and help 
to disrupt the insurgent organization, rather than whether it 
wins popular loyalty and support, or whether it contributes to a 
more productive, efficient, or equitable use of resources.” 

Other scholars have elaborated on the advantages of Wolfs 
“alternative approach,” which concerns itself with control of 
behavior rather than the mystique of popular support.For ex¬ 
ample, Morton H. Halperin, of the Harvard Center for Inter¬ 
national Affairs, writes that in Vietnam, the United States “has 
been able to prevent any large-scale Vietcong victories, regard¬ 
less of the loyalties of the people.” Thus we have an empirical 
demonstration of a certain principle of behavioral science, as 
Halperin notes: 

The events in Vietnam also illustrate the fact that most people 
tend to be motivated, not by abstract appeals, but rather by their 
perception of the course of action that is most likely to lead to 
their own personal security and to the satisfaction of their eco¬ 
nomic, social, and psychological desires.Thus, for example, large- 
scale American bombing in South Vietnam may have antag¬ 
onized a number of people; but at the same time it demonstrated 
to these people that the Vietcong could not guarantee their se¬ 
curity as it had been able to do before the bombing and that the 
belief in an imminent victory for the Vietcong might turn out to 
be dangerously false .33 


55 


* = AMERICAN POWER AND THE NEW MANDARINS 

In short, along with “confiscation of chickens, razing of houses, 
or destruction of villages,” we can also make effective use of 100 
pounds of explosives per person, 12 tons per square mile, as in 
Vietnam, as a technique for controlling behavior, relying on the 
principle, now once again confirmed by experiment, that satis¬ 
faction of desires is a more important motivation in human 
behavior than abstract appeals to loyalty.Surely this is ex¬ 
tremely sane advice.