the only nation that did not have a Communist insurrection 
within its borders and it was the only country that remained 
relatively stable and calm. As the United States considered 
measures to deter Communist aggression in Southeast Asia, a 
conservative and anti-Communist regime in Thailand became 
increasingly attractive regardless of its internal policies or 
methods of achieving power.” Phibun got the point. In August 
1949, “he stated that foreign pressure had become ‘alarming’ 
and that internal Communist activity had ‘vigorously in¬ 
creased.’ ” In 1950, Truman approved a $10 million grant for 
military aid. 

The new rulers made use of the substantial American military 
aid to convert the political system into “a more powerful and 
ruthless form of authoritarianism,” and to develop an extensive 
system of corruption, nepotism, and profiteering that helped 
maintain the loyalty of their followers. At the same time, 
“American corporations moved in, purchasing large quantities 
of rubber and tin . . . shipments of raw materials now went 
directly to the United States instead of through Hong Kong and 
Singapore.” 41 By 1958, “the United States purchased 90 per 
cent of Thailand’s rubber and most of its tin.” American in¬ 
vestment, however, remained low, because of the political in- 


62 



Objectivity and Liberal Scholarship 


stability as well as “the problems caused by more extensive 
public ownership and economic planning.” To improve matters, 
the Sarit dictatorship (see below) introduced tax benefits and 
guarantees against nationalization and competition from gov¬ 
ernment-owned commercial enterprises, and finally banned 
trade with China and abolished all monopolies, government or 
private, “in an attempt to attract private foreign capital.” 

American influence gave “material and moral support” to the 
Phibun dictatorship and “discouraged the political opposition.” 
It strengthened the executive power and “encouraged the mili¬ 
tary leaders to take even stronger measures in suppressing local 
opposition, using the excuse that all anti-government activity 
was Communist-inspired.” In 1954, Pridi Phanomyong, a liberal 
intellectual who had been the major participant in the over¬ 
throw of the absolute monarchy in 1932, had led the Free Thai 
underground during the war, and had been elected in 1946 
when Thai democracy reached “an all-time high,” appeared in 
