It is subject to regular bombardment 
from an island that is barely off the mainland, not to speak of 
overflights and commando raids, all under the protection of the 
Seventh Fleet, admittedly intervening in a civil war.For two 
years American planes have been bombing the only railroad 
connecting southwestern China, with its industrial center of 
Kunming, to the rest of the country—it happens to pass near 
Hanoi.Yet even a Roger Hilsman, one of the sanest voices 
commenting on Asian affairs, can speak of the “formidable 
threat” posed by Communist China, and can conclude that “it 
certainly served no useful purpose for the United States to re¬ 
ward aggression by recognizing Communist China or by encour¬ 
aging their being seated in the U.N.” 73 

It is illuminating to examine in detail Hilsman’s demonstra¬ 
tion of “Chinese belligerence.” The primary example of “Chi¬ 
nese aggression” (apart from “aggression” in Korea) is the sup¬ 
port for the “crude and unsophisticated” insurrections in 
“Burma, Thailand, Malaya, the Philippines, and French Indo¬ 
china,” which the Chinese succeeded in putting “on a more 


262 


The Logic of Withdrawal 


effective, politically sophisticated course” (p. 285).The history 
of “Chinese belligerence,” of the aggression which we must be 
careful not to reward, is completed with these instances: (1) 
the cancellation of trade contacts with Japan when the Kishi 
government would not allow the Chinese flag to be flown over 
its mission in Tokyo; (2) various unrealized threats to Hong 
Kong, including an appeal “to Nationalist leaders to make a 
deal”; (3) the suppression of the Tibetan revolt; (4) the Sino- 
Indian border crisis; (5) “encouraging the local communists in 
a direct use of military force, first in Laos and then in South 
Vietnam” (pp.288 f.).