33. Ibid., December 6, 1967. 

34. Christian Science Monitor, January 10, 1967. 

35. New York Times, November 21, 1967. 

36. Christian Science Monitor, November 24, 1967. 

37. See the Congressional Record, September 18, 1967, HI 1979, 
HI2030-8, for a summary. 

38. Resident Muselier to the Resident Superior, December 1897, cited 
in Vietnam: Fundamental Problems (Vietnamese Studies, No. 12; 
Hanoi, Foreign Languages Publishing House, 1966), p. 35. 

39. Lawrence Morrison, Chief of Industry Division and Mining, 
U.S.O.M., Saigon, 1955-1957, in Richard W. Lindholm, ed., Vietnam: 
The First Five Years (East Lansing, Michigan State University Press, 
1959), p. 215. 

40. See, for example, the report by David Halberstam, “Return to 
Vietnam,” Harper's , December 1967, pp. 47-58. 

41. Boston Globe , January 12, 1967. In May 1968, Ton That Thien was 
appointed Information Minister in Saigon. 

42. Last Reflections on a War, pp. 33, 47. Ton That Thien’s analogy 
to the Indian wars appeals to the American military mind, it seems. 
According to Mecklin {Mission in Torment , p. 27), Admiral Felt’s 
headquarters in Honolulu had, posted outside the war room, a no¬ 
tice w r hich purported to be the standing orders of Rogers’ Rangers 
in the French and Indian Wars. Testifying before the Senate Foreign 
Relations Committee, General Maxwell Taylor described our problem 

279 


AMERICAN POWER AND THE NEW MANDARINS 


in Vietnam as basically one of “security”: . I have often said it is 

very hard to plant the corn outside the stockade when the Indians are 
still around. We have to get the Indians farther away in many of the 
provinces to make good progress” (The Truth about Vietnam , p. 
267). See also Anthony Harrigan, A Guide to the War in Vietnam 
(Boulder, Colo., Panther Publications, 1966), for a view of the war 
that is probably representative of a significant segment of American 
opinion. He points out that American troops are “regaining a spirit 
that was characteristic of U.S. troops in the winning of a continent 
