
15. Masamichi Royama, Foreign Policy of Japan: 1914-1939 (Tokyo, 
Japanese Council, Institute of Pacific Relations, 1941), p. 8. He goes on 
to argue that it was Japanese inexperience that led to passivity and 
acceptance of the American attempt, with British backing, to attain 
hegemony in the Pacific—an obvious consequence of “equality” among 
unequals. 

16. Quoted in R. J. C. Butow, To jo and the Coming of War (Prince¬ 
ton, N.J., Princeton University Press, 1961), p. 17. 

17. W. C. Holland and K. L. Mitchell, eds., Problems of the Pacific, 
1936 (Chicago, University of Chicago Press, 1936), p. 195. 

18. Iriye Akira, After Imperialism (Cambridge, Mass., Harvard Uni¬ 
versity Press, 1965), p. 160. 

19. According to William L. Neumann, America Encounters Japan 
(Baltimore, The Johns Hopkins Press, 1963), p. 188, “over 200,000 
Japanese were living along the South Manchuria Railway and in the 
Kwantung leased territory.” Japanese estimates for Manchuria as a 
whole are much higher. Yasaka Takagi estimated the number of Japa¬ 
nese in Manchuria as approximately one million (“World Peace 
Machinery and the Asia Monroe Doctrine,” Pacific Affairs, Vol. 5 [No¬ 
vember 1932], pp. 941-53; reprinted in Toward International Under¬ 
standing [Tokyo, Kenkyusha, 1954]). 

20. Crowley, op. cit., p. 103. 

21. Ibid., p. 110. 


211 


AMERICAN POWER AND THE NEW MANDARINS 


22. Ibid., p. 140. 

23. Quoted in ibid., p. 154. 

24. Ibid., p. 160, The progress of civilization is indicated by the 
reaction to the American destruction of cities of the Mekong Delta in 
early February 1968, for example, the destruction of Ben Tre with 
thousands of civilian casualties to protect 20 American soldiers (20 
had been killed, in a garrison of 40), after the city had been taken 
over, virtually without a fight, by the NLF forces. 

25. Japan and Her Destiny, ed. F. S. G. Piggott (New York, E. P. 
