The 
collectivization decree of October 24 was rescinded and indus¬ 
tries were “freed” from workers’ control.Communist-led armies 
swept through Aragon, destroying many collectives and dis¬ 
mantling their organizations and, generally, bringing the area 
under the control of the central government.Throughout the 
Republican-held territories, the government, now under Com¬ 
munist domination, acted in accordance with the plan an¬ 
nounced in Pravda on December 17, 1936: “So far as Catalonia 
is concerned, the cleaning up of Trotzkyist and Anarcho-Syndi¬ 
calist elements there has already begun, and it will be carried 
out there with the same energy as in the U.S.S.R.” 71 —and, we 
may add, in much the same manner.In brief, the period from the summer of 1936 to 1937 was one 
of revolution and counterrevolution: the revolution was largely 
spontaneous with mass participation of anarchist and socialist 
industrial and agricultural workers; the counterrevolution was 
under Communist direction, the Communist party increasingly 
coming to represent the right wing of the Republic.During this 
period and after the success of the counterrevolution, the Re¬ 
public was waging a war against the Franco insurrection; this 
has been described in great detail in numerous publications, 
and I will say little about it here.