marked the ‘surplus power’ of the sovereign carrying out his legiti¬ 
mate vengeance; it is a quasi-equivalence at the level of interests: a 
little more interest in avoiding the penalty than in risking the crime. 

The rule of sufficient ideality. If the motive of a crime is the 
advantage expected of it, the effectiveness of the penalty is the dis¬ 
advantage expected of it. This means that the ‘pain’ at the heart of 
punishment is not the actual sensation of pain, but the idea of pain, 
displeasure, inconvenience - the ‘pain’ of the idea of ‘pain’. Punish¬ 
ment has to make use not of the body, but of representation. Or 
rather, if it does make use of the body, it is not so much as the sub¬ 
ject of a pain as the object of a representation: the memory of pain 
must prevent a repetition of the crime, just as the spectacle, how¬ 
ever artificial it may be, of a physical punishment may prevent the 
contagion of a crime. But it is not pain in itself that will be the 
instrument of the technique of punishment. Therefore, as long as 
possible, and except in cases requiring an effective representation, 
one should avoid recourse to the great panoply of the scaffold. 
There is an elision of the body as the subject of the punishment, but 
not necessarily as an element in a spectacle. The rejection of the 
public execution which, at the threshold of the theory, had found 


94 




Generalized punishment 


no more than a lyrical expression, was now offered the possibility 
of a rational articulation: what must be maximized is the representa¬ 
tion of the penalty, not its corporal reality. 

The rule of lateral effects. The penalty must have its most intense 
effects on those who have not committed the crime; to carry the 
argument to its limit, if one could be sure that the criminal could not 
repeat the crime, it would be enough to make others believe that he 
had been punished. There is a centrifugal intensification of effects, 
which leads to the paradox that in the calculation of penalties the 
least important element is still the criminal (unless he is likely to 
repeat the offence). Beccaria illustrated this paradox in the punish¬ 
ment that he proposed to replace the death sentence - perpetual 
slavery. Is this not a physically more cruel punishment than death.’ 
Not at all, he says: because the pain of slavery, for the condemned 
man, is divided into as many portions as he has moments left to live; 
it is an infinitely divisible penalty, an Eleatic penalty, much less 
severe than capital punishment, which is only one step away from 
the public execution. On the other hand, for those who see these 
