When 
Catherine II, in the years immediately following the treatise Des 
dilits et des peines, gave instructions to the commission entrusted 
with the task of drawing up a ‘new code of laws’, Beccaria’s lesson 
on the specificity and variety of penalties was not forgotten; it was 
repeated almost word for word: ‘It is a triumph of civil liberty when 
the criminal laws derive each penalty from the particular nature of 
each crime.In this way all arbitrariness ceases; the penalty does not 
depend on the caprice of the legislator, but on the nature of the 
thing; it is not man who does violence to man, but the man’s own 
action’ (article 67).A few years later, Beccaria’s general principle 
served as a foundation for the new Tuscan Code and for the new 
code given by Joseph II to Austria; and yet both legislations made 
imprisonment - modulated according to its duration and aug¬ 
mented in certain cases by branding or the use of irons - an almost 
uniform penalty: at least thirty years’ detention for an attempt on 
the sovereign’s life, for counterfeiting and for murder with robbery; 
fifteen to thirty years for voluntary homicide or armed robbery; one 
month to five years for simple theft, etc.® 

But if this colonization of the penalty by the prison is surprising, 
it is because imprisonment was not, as one might imagine, a punish¬ 
ment that was already securely established in the penal system, just 
below the death penalty, and which naturally occupied the place left 
vacant by the disappearance of public torture.In fact, imprisonment 


117 




Punishment 


-and on this point many countries were in the same situation as 
France - had only a limited and marginal position in the system of 
penalties.This is shown by the texts themselves.