the intelligence and the heart crushed by forced labour at too tender 
an age’ (Za Fraternite, November 1845). But this criminality of need 
or of repression masks, by the attention paid to it and the disappro¬ 
bation surrounding it, another criminality that is sometimes its 
cause and always its extension. This is the delinquency from above, 
a scandalous example, the source of misery and the principle of 
revolt for the poor. ‘While misery strews your streets with corpses, 
and fills your prisons with thieves and murderers, where are the 
swindlers of the fashionable world.^ — The most corrupting 
examples, the most revolting cynicism, the most shameless robbery. 

... Are you not afraid that the poor man put into the dock for 


287 



Prison 


snatching a piece of bread from a baker’s stall will not, one day, 
become so enraged that stone by stone he will demolish the Stock 
Exchange, a wild den where the treasure of the state and the fortune 
of families are stolen with impunity?’ {La Ruche populaire, Novem¬ 
ber 1842). But this delinquency of wealth is tolerated by the laws, 
and, when it does find its way into the courts, it can depend upon 
the indulgence of the judges and the discretion of the press.*® Hence 
the idea that criminal trials may become the occasion for a political 
debate, that advantage should be taken of controversial trials or 
proceedings instituted against workers to denounce the general 
functioning of penal justice: ‘The courts are no longer as they once 
were a place for the exhibition of the miseries and wounds of the 
time, a kind of branding in which the sad victims of our social dis¬ 
order are displayed side by side; it is an arena that echoes with the 
cry of combatants’ {La Fraternite, November 1841). Hence, too, the 
idea that political prisoners, since they have, like delinquents, a 
direct experience of the penal system, but, unlike them, are in a 
position to be heard, have a duty to be the spokesmen of all pri¬ 
soners; it is their task to enlighten ‘the good bourgeois of France, 
who has never known the penalties inflicted through the pompous 
indictments of a public prosecutor’ {Almanack populaire de la 
France, 1839, 50). 

In this reappraisal of penal justice and of the frontier that it 
carefully traces around delinquency, the tactic of what might be 
called the ‘counter-_/a/r divers' is characteristic. What the workers’ 
newspapers do is to reverse the use that was made of crimes or trials 
in the newspapers which, like the Gaiette des tribunaux, ‘gorge 
themselves with blood’, ‘feed on prison’ and provide a daily ‘reper¬ 
