41 




Torture 


death. How can a penalty be used as a means.^ one was later to ask. 
How can one treat as a punishment what ought to be a method of 
demonstration.^ The reason is to be found in the way in which 
criminal justice, in the classical period, operated the production of 
truth. The different pieces of evidence did not constitute so many 
neutral elements, until such time as they could be gathered together 
into a single body of evidence that would bring the final certainty 
of guilt. Each piece of evidence aroused a particular degree of 
abomination. Guilt did not begin when all the evidence was gathered 
together; piece by piece, it was constituted by each of the elements 
that made it possible to recognize a guilty person. Thus a semi¬ 
proof did not leave the suspect innocent until such time as it was 
completed; it made him semi-guilty; slight evidence of a serious 
crime marked someone as slightly criminal. In short, penal demon¬ 
stration did not obey a dualistic system: true or false; but a 
principle of continuous gradation; a degree reached in the demon¬ 
stration already formed a degree of guilt and consequently involved 
a degree of punishment. The suspect, as such, always deserved a 
certain punishment; one could not be the object of suspicion and be 
completely innocent. Suspicion implied an element of demonstration 
as regards the judge, the mark of a certain degree of guilt as regards 
the suspect and a limited form of penalty as regards punishment. A 
suspect, who remained a suspect, was not for all that declared inno¬ 
cent, but was partially punished. When one reached a certain degree 
of presumption, one could then legitimately bring into play a 
practice that had a dual role; to begin the punishment in pursuance 
of the information already collected and to make use of this first 
stage of punishment in order to extort the truth that was still miss¬ 
ing. In the eighteenth century, judicial torture functioned in that 
strange economy in which the ritual that produced the truth went 
side by side with the ritual that imposed the punishment. The body 
interrogated in torture constituted the point of application of the 
punishment and the locus of extortion of the truth. And just as 
presumption was inseparably an element in the investigation and a 
fragment of guilt, the regulated pain involved in judicial torture 
was a means both of punishment and of investigation. 

Now, curiously enough, this interlocking of the two rituals 


42 

