*® Hence 
the idea that criminal trials may become the occasion for a political 
debate, that advantage should be taken of controversial trials or 
proceedings instituted against workers to denounce the general 
functioning of penal justice: ‘The courts are no longer as they once 
were a place for the exhibition of the miseries and wounds of the 
time, a kind of branding in which the sad victims of our social dis¬ 
order are displayed side by side; it is an arena that echoes with the 
cry of combatants’ {La Fraternite, November 1841).Hence, too, the 
idea that political prisoners, since they have, like delinquents, a 
direct experience of the penal system, but, unlike them, are in a 
position to be heard, have a duty to be the spokesmen of all pri¬ 
soners; it is their task to enlighten ‘the good bourgeois of France, 
who has never known the penalties inflicted through the pompous 
indictments of a public prosecutor’ {Almanack populaire de la 
France, 1839, 50).In this reappraisal of penal justice and of the frontier that it 
carefully traces around delinquency, the tactic of what might be 
called the ‘counter-_/a/r divers' is characteristic.What the workers’ 
newspapers do is to reverse the use that was made of crimes or trials 
in the newspapers which, like the Gaiette des tribunaux, ‘gorge 
themselves with blood’, ‘feed on prison’ and provide a daily ‘reper¬ 
toire of melodrama’ {Pauvre Jacques, ist year, no.3).