What is peculiar to modern societies, in fact, is not that they 
consigned sex to a shadow existence, but that they dedicated 
themselves to speaking of it ad infinitum, while exploiting it 
as the secret.2 


The Perverse 
Implantation 


A possible objection: it would be a mistake to see in this 
proliferation of discourses merely a quantitative phenome¬ 
non, something like a pure increase, as if what was said in 
them were immaterial, as if the fact of speaking about sex 
were of itself more important than the forms of imperatives 
that were imposed on it by speaking about it.For was this 
transformation of sex into discourse not governed by the 
endeavor to expel from reality the forms of sexuality that 
were ntrt amenable to the strict economy of reproduction: to 
say no to unproductive activities, to banish casual pleasures, 
to reduce or exclude practices whose object was not procrea¬ 
tion?Through the various discourses, legal sanctions against 
minor perversions were multiplied; sexual irregularity was 
annexed to mental illness; from childhood to old age, a norm 
of sexual development was defined and all the possible devia¬ 
tions were carefully described; pedagogical controls and 
medical treatments were organized; around the least fanta¬ 
sies, moralists, but especially doctors, brandished the whole 
emphatic vocabulary of abomination.Were these anything 
more than means employed to absorb, for the benefit of a 
genitally centered sexuality, all the fruitless pleasures?