The 
essential features of this sexuality are not the expression of 
a representation that is more or less distorted by ideology, or 
of a misunderstanding caused by taboos; they correspond to 
the functional requirements of a discourse that must produce 
its truth.Situated at the point of intersection of a technique 
of confession and a scientific discursivity, where certain 
major mechanisms had to be found for adapting them to one 
another (the listening technique, the postulate of causality, 
the principle of latency, the rule of interpretation, the imper¬ 
ative of medicalization), sexuality was defined as being “by 
nature”: a domain susceptible to pathological processes, and 
hence one calling for therapeutic or normalizing interven¬ 
tions; a field of meanings to decipher; the site of processes 
concealed by specific mechanisms; a focus of indefinite causal 
relations; and an obscure speech (parole) that had to be 
ferreted out and listened to.The “economy” of discourses— 
their intrinsic technology, the necessities of their operation, 



Scientia Sexualis 


69 


the tactics they employ, the effects of power which underlie 
them and which they transmit—this, and not a system of 
representations, is what determines the essential features of 
what they have to say.The history of sexuality—that is, the 
history of what functioned in the nineteenth century as a 
specific field of truth—must first be written from the view¬ 
point of a history of discourses.Let us put forward a general working hypothesis.