his arms” around his lover and “gives him kisses.” 30 This 
moment is important: unlike what occurs in the art of court¬ 
ship, the “dialectic of love” in this case calls for two move¬ 
ments exactly alike on the part of the two lovers; the love is 
the same for both of them, since it is the motion that carries 
them toward truth. 

4. From the virtue of the loved boy to the master's love and 
wisdom. In the art of courtship, it fell to the lover to do the 
wooing; and even though he was expected to keep control of 
himself, it was clear that the compelling force of his love 
r/sked overcoming him in spite of himself. The solid point of 
resistance was the boy’s honor, his dignity, the reasonable 
obstinacy with which he might refuse. But from the moment 
when Eros appeals to truth, it is the one who is the more 
advanced on the road of love, the one who is more truly 



True Love 


241 


enamored of truth, who will best be able to guide the other and 
help him to keep from degrading himself in all the base pleas¬ 
ures. The one who is better versed in love will also be the 
master of truth; and it will be his role to teach the loved one 
how to triumph over his desires and become “stronger than 
himself.” In the love relation, and as a consequence of that 
relation to truth which now structures it, a new figure makes 
its appearance: that of the master, coming to take the place of 
the lover; moreover, this personage, through the complete 
mastery that he exercises over himself, will turn the game 
upside down, reverse the roles, establish the principle of a 
renunciation of the aphrodisia, and become, for all young men 
who are eager for truth, an object of love. 

This is doubtless the meaning that should be given to the 
description, in the last pages of the Symposium, of the rela¬ 
tions that Socrates maintains not only with Alcibiades, but 
also with Charmides, the son of Glaucon; with Euthydemus, 
the son of Diodes; and with many others in addition. 31 The 
distribution of roles is completely reversed: it is the young 
boys—those who are beautiful, with many suitors—who are 
enamored of Socrates; they dog his footsteps, they try to se¬ 
duce him, they would like very much to grant him their favors 
—that is, for him to communicate the treasure of his wisdom. 
They are in the position of erastes, and he, the old man with 
