Neither are we 
dealing with paradoxical forms of pleasure that turn back on 
power and invest it in the form of a “pleasure to be endured.” 
The implantation of perversions is an instrument-effect: it is 
through the isolation, intensification, and consolidation of 
peripheral sexualities that the relations of power to sex and 
pleasure branched out and multiplied, measured the body, 
and penetrated modes of conduct.And accompanying this 
encroachment of powers, scattered sexualities rigidified, be¬ 
came stuck to an age, a place, a type of practice.A prolifera¬ 
tion of sexualities through the extension of power; an optimi¬ 
zation of the power to which each of these local sexualities 
gave a surface of intervention: this concatenation, particu¬ 
larly since the nineteenth century, has been ensured and 
relayed by the countless economic interests which, with the 
help of medicine, psychiatry, prostitution, and pornography, 
have tapped into both this analytical multiplication of pleas¬ 
ure and this optimization of the power that controls it.Pleas¬ 
ure and power do not cancel or turn back against 
one another; they seek out, overlap, and reinforce one an¬ 
other.They are linked together by complex mechanisms and 
devices of excitation and incitement.