and sometimes crime. They were children wise beyond their 
years, precocious little girls, ambiguous schoolboys, dubious 
servants and educators, cruel or maniacal husbands, solitary 
collectors, ramblers with bizarre impulses; they haunted the 
houses of correction, the penal colonies, the tribunals, and 
the asylums; they carried their infamy to the doctors and 
their sickness to the judges. This was the numberless family 
of perverts who were on friendly terms with delinquents and 
akin to madmen. In the course of the century they succes¬ 
sively bore the stamp of “moral folly,” “genital neurosis,” 
“aberration of the genetic instinct,” “degenerescence,” or 
“physical imbalance.” 

What does the appearance of all these peripheral sexuali¬ 
ties signify? Is the fact that they could appear in broad day¬ 
light a sign that the code had become more lax? Or does the 
fact that they were given so much attention testify to a 
stricter regime and to its concern to bring them under close 
supervision? In terms of repression, things are unclear. There 
was permissiveness, if one bears in mind that the severity of 
the codes relating to sexual offenses diminished considerably 
in the nineteenth century and that law itself often deferred 



The Repressive Hypothesis 


41 


to medicine. But an additional ruse of severity, if one thinks 
of all the agencies of control and all the mechanisms of 
surveillance that were put into operation by pedagogy or 
therapeutics. It may be the case that the intervention of the 
Church in conjugal sexuality and its rejection of “frauds” 
against procreation had lost much of their insistence over the 
previous two hundred years. But medicine made a forceful 
entry into the pleasures of the couple: it created an entire 
organic, functional, or mental pathology arising out of “in¬ 
complete” sexual practices; it carefully classified all forms of 
related pleasures; it incorporated them into the notions of 
“development” and instinctual “disturbances”; and it under¬ 
took to manage them. 

Perhaps the point to consider is not the level of indulgence 
or the quantity of repression but the form of power that was 
exercised. When this whole thicket of disparate sexualities 
was labeled, as if to disentangle them from one another, was 
the object to exclude them from reality? It appears, in fact, 
