eral purification of the body that will ensure the quietude 
necessary to the sexual function. It is in this way that “the 
farmer sows only after having first cleansed the soil and 
removed any foreign material.” 7 Soranus, who gives this ad¬ 
vice, puts no trust in those who prescribe, for a good concep¬ 
tion, waiting until the period of the full moon; the essential 
thing is to choose “a time in which the body is neither in want 
nor overburdened, but in a satisfactory state in every respect” 
—both for physiological reasons (the harmful humors that 
rise up in the body may prevent the seed from adhering to the 
fundus of the uterus) and for ethical reasons (the embryo will 
be imbued with the condition of the procreators). 

There is, of course, a time more favorable than others in the 
woman’s cycle. According to a metaphor that is already quite 
ancient and that will still do long service in Christianity, 
“every season is not propitious for sewing seed upon the land 
for the purpose of bringing forth fruit, so in humans too not 
every time is suitable for conception of the seed discharged in 
intercourse.” 8 Soranus places this favorable time immediately 
after menstruation. His argumentation rests on the metaphor 
—which is not personal to him, moreover—of the appetite. 9 
The uterus is avid; it consumes, it loads itself with nutriment, 
sometimes with blood (the normal case), sometimes with seed 
(and fertilization occurs). To be procreative, the sexual act 
must take place at a favorable time in this alimentary rhythm. 
Not before menstruation, for “just as the stomach when over¬ 
burdened with some kind of material and turned to nausea is 
disposed to vomit what oppresses it and is averse to receiving 
food, so according to the same principle, the uterus, being 
congested at the time of menstruation, is well adapted for the 
evacuation of the blood which has flowed into it, but is unfitted 
for the reception and retention of the seed.” Not during men¬ 
strual evacuation, which constitutes a kind of natural vomit¬ 
ing, when the semen runs the risk of being swept out as well. 
Nor when the flow has completely stopped: the uterus, desic¬ 
cated and chilled, is then no longer in a condition to receive 



The Body 


127 


the seed. The favorable time is when “the flow is ceasing,” so 
that the uterus is still moist with blood and permeated with 
warmth, “and hence turgescent with a craving to receive the 
sperm.” 10 This craving, which reappears in the body after 
