


32 


The Use of Pleasure 


tices of the self that were associated with them) were defined, 
modified, recast, and diversified. 

I am not supposing that the codes are unimportant. But one 
notices that they ultimately revolve around a rather small 
number of rather simple principles: perhaps men are not much 
more inventive when it comes to interdictions than they are 
when it comes to pleasures. Their stability is also rather re¬ 
markable; the notable proliferation of codifications (concern¬ 
ing permitted or forbidden places, partners, and acts) 
occurred rather late in Christianity. On the other hand, it 
appears—at any rate this is the hypothesis I would like to 
explore here—that there is a whole rich and complex field of 
historicity in the way the individual is summoned to recognize 
himself as an ethical subject of sexual conduct. This will be a 
matter of seeing how that subjectivation was defined and 
transformed, from classical Greek thought up to the formula¬ 
tion of the Christian doctrine and pastoral ministry regarding 
the flesh. 

In this volume, I would like to take note of some general 
traits that characterized the way in which sexual behavior was 
considered by classical Greek thought as a domain of moral 
valuation and choice. I will start from the then common no¬ 
tion of “use of the pleasures ”—chresis aphrodision —and at¬ 
tempt to determine the modes of subjectivation to which it 
referred: the ethical substance, the types of subjection, the 
forms of elaboration of the self, and the moral teleology. Then, 
starting each time from a practice whose existence, status, and 
rules were native to Greek culture (the practice of the health 
regimen, that of household management, that of courtship), I 
will study the way in which medical and philosophical 
thought worked out this “use of the pleasures,” formulating 
several recurrent themes of austerity that would center on 
four great axes of experience: the relation to one’s body, the 
relation to one’s wife, the relation to boys, and the rela¬ 
tion to truth. 



PART ONE 
