* It is the existence of this disparity that marked the 
relationship that philosophers and moralists concerned them¬ 
selves with.This special attention should not lead us to draw 
hasty conclusions either about the sexual behaviors of the 
Greeks or about the details of their tastes (even though there 
is evidence from many areas of their culture that very young 
men were both represented and recognized as highly desirable 
erotic objects).We must not imagine in any case that only this 
type of relation was practiced; one finds many references to 
male love relationships that did not conform to this schema 
and did not include this “age differential.” We would be just 
as mistaken to suppose that, though practiced, these other 
forms of relations were frowned upon and regarded as un¬ 
seemly.Relations between young boys were deemed com¬ 
pletely natural and in keeping with their condition.f On the 
other hand, people could mention as a special case—without 
censure—an abiding love relationship between two men who 
were well past adolescence.^ Doubtless for reasons having to 
do, as we shall see, with the polar opposition of activity and 
passivity, an opposition regarded as necessary, relations be¬ 
tween two grown men were more apt to be an object of criti¬ 
cism and irony.Passivity was always disliked, and for an adult 
to be suspected of it was especially serious.