But the conversio ad se is also 
a path by which, escaping all the dependences and enslave¬ 
ments, one ultimately rejoins oneself, like a harbor sheltered 
from the tempests or a citadel protected by its ramparts: “The 
soul stands on unassailable grounds, if it has abandoned exter¬ 
nal things; it is independent in its own fortress; and every 
weapon that is hurled falls short of the mark.Fortune has not 
the long reach with which we credit her; she can seize none 
except him that clings to her.Let us then recoil from her as 
far as we are able.” 65 

This relation to self that constitutes the end of the conver¬ 
sion and the final goal of all the practices of the self still 
belongs to an ethics of control.Yet, in order to characterize 
it, moralists are not content with invoking the agonistic form 
of a victory over forces difficult to subdue and of a dominion 
over them that can be established beyond question.This rela¬ 
tion is often conceived in terms of the juridical model of 
possession: one “belongs to himself,” one is “his own master” 
{suum fieri, suum esse are expressions that recur often in 
Seneca); 66 one is answerable only to oneself, one is sui juris; 
one exercises over oneself an authority that nothing limits or 
threatens; one holds the potestas sui.