The object therefore was not to 
show that pleasure was to be sought elsewhere than with the 
legal wife, but that legitimate descendants could not be ob¬ 
tained except with the wife herself.This is why, as Lacey 
comments, it would be a mistake to interpret this text as 
offering a definition of three distinct roles; it is more in the 
nature of a cumulative enumeration, to be read as follows: 
pleasure is the only thing a courtesan can give; as for the 
concubine, she is capable of providing the satisfactions of 
everyday life besides; but only the wife can exercise a certain 
function that is owing to her special status: she can bear 
legitimate children and ensure the continuity of the family 
institution.11 It needs to be understood that in Athens mar¬ 
riage was not the only kind of union that was accepted; it 
actually formed a particular and privileged union, which alone 
could lead to matrimonial cohabitation and legitimate off¬ 
spring.Further, there exists a good deal of evidence testifying 
to the value that was attached to the wife’s beauty, to the 
importance of the sexual relations that one might have with 
her, and to the existence of mutual love (as in the play of Eros 



150 


The Use of Pleasure 


and Anteros that unites Niceratus and his wife in Xenophon’s 
Symposium).11 The radical separation between marriage and 
the play of pleasures and passions is doubtless not an adequate 
formula for characterizing marital life in antiquity.