Thus “sex” 



154 


The History of Sexuality 


was defined by the interlacing of function and instinct, final¬ 
ity and signification; moreover, this was the form in which 
it was manifested, more clearly than anywhere else, in the 
model perversion, in that “fetishism” which, from at least as 
early as 1877, served as the guiding thread for analyzing all 
the other deviations.In it one could clearly perceive the way 
in which the instinct became fastened to an object in accord¬ 
ance with an individual’s historical adherence and biological 
inadequacy.Lastly, in the socialization of procreative behav¬ 
ior, “sex” was described as being caught between a law of 
reality (economic necessity being its most abrupt and imme¬ 
diate form) and an economy of pleasure which was always 
attempting to circumvent that law—when, that is, it did not 
ignore it altogether.The most notorious of “frauds,” coitus 
interruptus, represented the point where the insistence of the 
real forced an end to pleasure and where the pleasure found 
a way to surface despite the economy dictated by the real.It 
is apparent that the deployment of sexuality, with its differ¬ 
ent strategies, was what established this notion of “sex”; and 
in the four major forms of hysteria, onanism, fetishism, and 
interrupted coition, it showed this sex to be governed by the 
interplay of whole and part, principle and lack, absence and 
presence, excess and deficiency, by the function of instinct, 
finality, and meaning, of reality and pleasure.