For the first, what is pertinent is the 
link between partners and definite statutes; the second is 
concerned with the sensations of the body, the quality of 
pleasures, and the nature of impressions, however tenuous or 
imperceptible these may be.Lastly, if the deployment of 
alliance is firmly tied to the economy due to the role it can 
play in the transmission or circulation of wealth, the deploy¬ 
ment of sexuality is linked to the economy through numer- 



The Deployment of Sexuality 


107 


ous and subtle relays, the main one of which, however, is the 
body—the body that produces and consumes.In a word, the 
deployment of alliance is attuned to a homeostasis of the 
social body, which it has the function of maintaining; whence 
its privileged link with the law; whence too the fact that the 
important phase for it is “reproduction.” The deployment of 
sexuality has its reason for being, not in reproducing itself, 
but in proliferating, innovating, annexing, creating, and 
penetrating bodies in an increasingly detailed way, and in 
controlling populations in an increasingly comprehensive 
way.We are compelled, then, to accept three or four hypoth¬ 
eses which run counter to the one on which the theme of a 
sexuality repressed by the modern forms of society is based: 
sexuality is tied to recent devices of power; it has been ex¬ 
panding at an increasing rate since the seventeenth century; 
the arrangement that has sustained it is not governed by 
reproduction; it has been linked from the outset with an 
intensification of the body—with its exploitation as an object 
of knowledge and an element in relations of power.It is not exact to say that the deployment of sexuality 
supplanted the deployment of alliance.