ity was constructed. First the practice of penance, then that 
of the examination of conscience and spiritual direction, was 
the formative nucleus: as we have seen, 1 what was at issue to 
begin with at the tribunal of penance was sex insofar as it was 
the basis of relations; the questions posed had to do with the 
commerce allowed or forbidden (adultery, extramarital rela¬ 
tions, relations with a person prohibited by blood or statute, 
the legitimate or illegitimate character of the act of sexual 

1 Cf page 37 above. 



108 


The History of Sexuality 


congress); then, coinciding with the new pastoral and its 
application in seminaries, secondary schools, and convents, 
there was a gradual progression away from the problematic 
of relations toward a problematic of the “flesh,” that is, of 
the body, sensation, the nature of pleasure, the more secret 
forms of enjoyment or acquiescence. “Sexuality” was taking 
shape, born of a technology of power that was originally 
focused on alliance. Since then, it has not ceased to operate 
in conjunction with a system of alliance on which it has 
depended for support. The family cell, in the form in which 
it came to be valued in the course of the eighteenth century, 
made it possible for the main elements of the deployment of 
sexuality (the feminine body, infantile precocity, the regula¬ 
tion of births, and to a lesser extent no doubt, the specifica¬ 
tion of the perverted) to develop along its two primary 
dimensions: the husband-wife axis and the parents-children 
axis. The family, in its contemporary form, must not be 
understood as a social, economic, and political structure of 
alliance that excludes or at least restrains sexuality, that 
diminishes it as much as possible, preserving only its useful 
functions. On the contrary, its role is to anchor sexuality and 
provide it with a permanent support. It ensures the produc¬ 
tion of a sexuality that is not homogeneous with the privi¬ 
leges of alliance, while making it possible for the systems of 
alliance to be imbued with a new tactic of power which they 
would otherwise be impervious to. The family is the inter¬ 
change of sexuality and alliance: it conveys the law and the 
juridical dimension in the deployment of sexuality; and it 
conveys the economy of pleasure and the intensity of sensa¬ 
tions in the regime of alliance. 

