” Of course, 
they were subjected in specific ways to the deployment of 
“alliances”: the exploitation of legitimate marriage and fertil¬ 
ity, the exclusion of consanguine sexual union, prescriptions 
of social and local endogamy.On the other hand, it is un¬ 
likely that the Christian technology of the flesh ever had any 
importance for them.As for the mechanisms of sexualiza- 
tion, these penetrated them slowly and apparently in three 
successive stages.The first involved the problems of birth 
control, when it was discovered, at the end of the eighteenth 
century, that the art of fooling nature was not the exclusive 
privilege of city dwellers and libertines, but was known and 
practiced by those who, being close to nature itself, should 
have held it to be more repugnant than anyone else did.Next 



122 


The History of Sexuality 


the organization of the “conventional” family came to be 
regarded, sometime around the eighteen-thirties, as an indis¬ 
pensable instrument of political control and economic regu¬ 
lation for the subjugation of the urban proletariat: there was 
a great campaign for the “moralization of the poorer 
classes.” The last stage came at the end of the nineteenth 
century with the development of the juridical and medical 
control of perversions, for the sake of a general protection of 
society and the race.