1 


Aphrodisia 


The Suda gives a definition of aphrodisia that will be re¬ 
peated by Hesychius: aphrodisia are “the works, the acts of 
Aphrodite” (erga Aphrodites).Doubtless one should not ex¬ 
pect to see a very rigorous attempt at conceptualization in 
such a work as the one mentioned, but it is a fact that the 
Greeks had not evinced, either in their theoretical reflection 
or in their practical thinking, a very insistent concern for 
defining precisely what they meant by aphrodisia —whether it 
was a question of determining the nature of the thing desig¬ 
nated, of delimiting its scope, or of drawing up an inventory 
of its elements.In any case, they had nothing resembling those 
long lists of possible acts, such as one finds later in the peniten¬ 
tial books, the manuals of confession, or in works on psy¬ 
chopathology; no table that served to define what was licit, 
permitted, or normal, and to describe the vast family of pro¬ 
hibited gestures.Nor was there anything resembling the con¬ 
cern—which was so characteristic of the question of the flesh 
or of sexuality—for discovering the insidious presence of a 
power of undetermined limits and multiple masks beneath 
what appeared inoffensive or innocent.Neither classification 
nor decipherment.