For example, the 
documents assembled by Van Gulik, pertaining to ancient 
Chinese culture, seem to show the presence of this same the¬ 
matic complex: fear of the irrepressible and costly act, dread 
of its harmful consequences for the body and health, represen¬ 
tation of the man-woman relationship in the form of a contest, 
preoccupation with obtaining descendants of good quality by 
means of a well-regulated sexual activity.30 But the ancient 
Chinese “bedroom” treatises responded to that anxiety in a 
manner completely different from what one finds in classical 
Greece.The dread one felt when faced with the violence of the 
act and the fear of losing one’s semen were answered by meth¬ 
ods of willful retention; the encounter with the other sex was 
perceived as a way to come into contact with the vital princi¬ 
ple the latter held in her possession and, by absorbing it, to 
internalize it for one’s own benefit.So that a well-managed 
sexual activity not only precluded any danger, it could also 
result in a strengthening of one’s existence and it could be a 
means of restoring one’s youthfulness.Elaboration and exer¬ 
cise in this case concerned the act itself, its unfolding, the play 
of forces that sustained it, and of course the pleasure with 
which it was associated; the nullification or indefinite post¬ 
ponement of its completion enabled one both to carry it to its 
highest degree in the realm of pleasure and to turn it to one’s 
greatest advantage in life.