In this sense, the man 
of pleasures and desires, the man of nonmastery (akrasia) or 



The Moral Problematization of Pleasures 


85 


self-indulgence (akolasia) was a man who could be called 
feminine, but more essentially with respect to himself than 
with respect to others.In the experience of sexuality such as 
ours, where a basic scansion maintains an opposition between 
masculine and feminine, the femininity of men is perceived in 
the actual or virtual transgression of his sexual role.No one 
would be tempted to label as effeminate a man whose love for 
women leads to immoderation on his part; that is, short of 
doing a whole job of decipherment that would uncover the 
“latent homosexuality” that secretly inhabits his unstable and 
promiscuous relation to them.In contrast, for the Greeks it 
was the opposition between activity and passivity that was 
essential, pervading the domain of sexual behaviors and that 
of moral attitudes as well; thus, it was not hard to see how a 
man might prefer males without anyone even suspecting him 
of effeminacy, provided he was active in the sexual relation 
and active in the moral mastering of himself.On the other 
hand, a man who was not sufficiently in control of his pleas¬ 
ures—whatever his choice of object—was regarded as “femi¬ 
nine.” The dividing line between a virile man and an 
effeminate man did not coincide with our opposition between 
hetero- and homosexuality; nor was it confined to the opposi¬ 
tion between active and passive homosexuality.