illicit, whereas the deployment of sexuality operates accord¬ 
ing to mobile, polymorphous, and contingent techniques of 
power. The deployment of alliance has as one of its chief 
objectives to reproduce the interplay of relations and main¬ 
tain the law that governs them; the deployment of sexuality, 
on the other hand, engenders a continual extension of areas 
and forms of control. For the first, what is pertinent is the 
link between partners and definite statutes; the second is 
concerned with the sensations of the body, the quality of 
pleasures, and the nature of impressions, however tenuous or 
imperceptible these may be. Lastly, if the deployment of 
alliance is firmly tied to the economy due to the role it can 
play in the transmission or circulation of wealth, the deploy¬ 
ment of sexuality is linked to the economy through numer- 



The Deployment of Sexuality 


107 


ous and subtle relays, the main one of which, however, is the 
body—the body that produces and consumes. In a word, the 
deployment of alliance is attuned to a homeostasis of the 
social body, which it has the function of maintaining; whence 
its privileged link with the law; whence too the fact that the 
important phase for it is “reproduction.” The deployment of 
sexuality has its reason for being, not in reproducing itself, 
but in proliferating, innovating, annexing, creating, and 
penetrating bodies in an increasingly detailed way, and in 
controlling populations in an increasingly comprehensive 
way. We are compelled, then, to accept three or four hypoth¬ 
eses which run counter to the one on which the theme of a 
sexuality repressed by the modern forms of society is based: 
sexuality is tied to recent devices of power; it has been ex¬ 
panding at an increasing rate since the seventeenth century; 
the arrangement that has sustained it is not governed by 
reproduction; it has been linked from the outset with an 
intensification of the body—with its exploitation as an object 
of knowledge and an element in relations of power. 

It is not exact to say that the deployment of sexuality 
supplanted the deployment of alliance. One can imagine that 
one day it will have replaced it. But as things stand at pre¬ 
sent, while it does tend to cover up the deployment of alli¬ 
ance, it has neither obliterated the latter nor rendered it 
useless. Moreover, historically it was around and on the basis 
of the deployment of alliance that the deployment of sexual¬ 
ity was constructed. First the practice of penance, then that 
of the examination of conscience and spiritual direction, was 
the formative nucleus: as we have seen, 1 what was at issue to 
begin with at the tribunal of penance was sex insofar as it was 
the basis of relations; the questions posed had to do with the 
commerce allowed or forbidden (adultery, extramarital rela¬ 
tions, relations with a person prohibited by blood or statute, 
the legitimate or illegitimate character of the act of sexual 

1 Cf page 37 above. 



108 


The History of Sexuality 


congress); then, coinciding with the new pastoral and its 
application in seminaries, secondary schools, and convents, 
there was a gradual progression away from the problematic 
of relations toward a problematic of the “flesh,” that is, of 
the body, sensation, the nature of pleasure, the more secret 
forms of enjoyment or acquiescence. “Sexuality” was taking 
shape, born of a technology of power that was originally 
focused on alliance. Since then, it has not ceased to operate 
in conjunction with a system of alliance on which it has 
depended for support. The family cell, in the form in which 
it came to be valued in the course of the eighteenth century, 
made it possible for the main elements of the deployment of 
sexuality (the feminine body, infantile precocity, the regula¬ 
tion of births, and to a lesser extent no doubt, the specifica¬ 
tion of the perverted) to develop along its two primary 
dimensions: the husband-wife axis and the parents-children 
axis. The family, in its contemporary form, must not be 
understood as a social, economic, and political structure of 
alliance that excludes or at least restrains sexuality, that 
diminishes it as much as possible, preserving only its useful 
functions. On the contrary, its role is to anchor sexuality and 
provide it with a permanent support. It ensures the produc¬ 
tion of a sexuality that is not homogeneous with the privi¬ 
leges of alliance, while making it possible for the systems of 
alliance to be imbued with a new tactic of power which they 
would otherwise be impervious to. The family is the inter¬ 
change of sexuality and alliance: it conveys the law and the 
juridical dimension in the deployment of sexuality; and it 
conveys the economy of pleasure and the intensity of sensa¬ 
tions in the regime of alliance. 

