The Repressive Hypothesis 


49 


We must therefore abandon the hypothesis that modern 
industrial societies ushered in an age of increased sexual 
repression.We have not only witnessed a visible explosion of 
unorthodox sexualities; but—and this is the important point 
—a deployment quite different from the law, even if it is 
locally dependent on procedures of prohibition, has ensured, 
through a network of interconnecting mechanisms, the pro¬ 
liferation of specific pleasures and the multiplication of dis¬ 
parate sexualities.It is said that no society has been more 
prudish; never have the agencies of power taken such care to 
feign ignorance of the thing they prohibited, as if they were 
determined to have nothing to do with it.But it is the oppo¬ 
site that has become apparent, at least after a general review 
of the facts: never have there existed more centers of power; 
never more attention manifested and verbalized; never more 
circular contacts and linkages; never more sites where the 
intensity of pleasures and the persistency of power catch 
hold, only to spread elsewhere.PART THREE 

Scientia Sexualis 




I suppose that the first two points will be granted me; I 
imagine that people will accept my saying that, for two cen¬ 
turies now, the discourse on sex has been multiplied rather 
than rarefied; and that if it has carried with it taboos and 
prohibitions, it has also, in a more fundamental way, ensured 
the solidification and implantation of an entire sexual mo¬ 
saic.