
Index 161 



PART ON E 

We “Other Victorians” 




For a long time, the story goes, we supported a Victorian 
regime, and we continue to be dominated by it even today. 
Thus the image of the imperial prude is emblazoned on our 
restrained, mute, and hypocritical sexuality. 

At the beginning of the seventeenth century a certain 
frankness was still common, it would seem. Sexual practices 
had little need of secrecy; words were said without undue 
reticence, and things were done without too much conceal¬ 
ment; one had a tolerant familiarity with the illicit. Codes 
regulating the coarse, the obscene, and the indecent were 
quite lax compared to those of the nineteenth century. It was 
a time of direct gestures, shameless discourse, and open 
transgressions, when anatomies were shown and intermin¬ 
gled at will, and knowing children hung about amid the 
laughter of adults: it was a period when bodies “made a 
display of themselves.” 

But twilight soon fell upon this bright day, followed by the 
monotonous nights of the Victorian bourgeoisie. Sexuality 
was carefully confined; it moved into the home. The conjugal 
family took custody of it and absorbed it into the serious 
function of reproduction. On the subject of sex, silence be¬ 
came the rule. The legitimate and procreative couple laid 
down the law. The couple imposed itself as model, enforced 
the norm, safeguarded the truth, and reserved the right to 
speak while retaining the principle of secrecy. A single locus 
of sexuality was acknowledged in social space as well as at 
the heart of every household, but it was a utilitarian and 
fertile one: the parents’ bedroom. The rest had only to re¬ 
main vague; proper demeanor avoided contact with other 
bodies, and verbal decency sanitized one’s speech. And ster- 

3 



4 
