Economics 


145 


life, unless it was a matter of the husband’s obtaining legiti¬ 
mate and promising descendants.Thus, it is quite logical that 
one finds in Greek thought technical and medical inquiries 
concerning sterility and its causes, 3 considerations from the 
viewpoint of dietetics and hygiene on how to have healthy 
children (and boys rather than girls)/ political and social 
reflections on the best possible matching of marriage partners, 5 
and finally, juridical debates on the conditions in which 
descendants could be considered legitimate and have the 
benefit of citizenship (this was what was at issue in Against 
Neaera).Moreover, one fails to see why the problematization of 
sexual relations between spouses would take other forms or 
become attached to other questions, given the status of mar¬ 
ried couples in Athens and the obligations to which both 
husband and wife were held.The definition of what was al¬ 
lowed, forbidden, and prescribed for spouses by the institution 
of marriage in matters of sexual practice was simple enough, 
and clearly symmetrical enough so that additional moral regu¬ 
lation did not appear necessary.As far as women were con¬ 
cerned, in fact, they were bound by their juridical and social 
status as wives; all their sexual activity had to be within the 
conjugal relationship and their husband had to be their exclu¬ 
sive partner.