For 
even the despising of pleasure is itself most pleasurable, when 
we are habituated to it; and just as those accustomed to a life 
of pleasure feel disgust when they pass over to the opposite 
experience, so those whose training has been of the opposite 
kind derive more pleasure from despising pleasure than from 



74 


The Use of Pleasure 


the pleasures themselves [hedion auton ton hedonon kataphro- 
nousi ].” 37 

The importance of exercise would not be neglected in the 
subsequent philosophical tradition.In fact it was considerably 
amplified: new exercises were added, and procedures, objec¬ 
tives, and possible variants were defined; their effectiveness 
was debated; askesis in its different forms (training, medita¬ 
tion, tests of thinking, examination of conscience, control of 
representations) eventually became a subject matter for teach¬ 
ing and constituted one of the basic instruments used in the 
direction of souls.By contrast, in the texts of the classical 
period one finds relatively few details on the concrete form 
that the ethical askesis could take.Doubtless the Pythagorean 
tradition recognized many exercises: dietary regimens, review¬ 
ing of one’s misdeeds at the end of the day, or meditation 
practices that ought to precede sleep so as to ward off bad 
dreams and encourage the visions that might come from the 
gods.Plato makes a precise reference to these evening spiritual 
preparations in a passage of the Republic in which he evokes 
the danger of desires that are always apt to invade the soul.