All of this was blatant deception.The wording of the agreements 
reflected the DRV-PRG position in all the respects Kissinger men¬ 
tioned, while Kissinger’s insinuation that the agreements permitted the 
United States to recognize the GVN as “the legitimate ruler of South 
Vietnam” is in explicit contradiction to the agreements he had just 
signed, as is his attempt to create the impression that the “civil war” 
is “between North and South Vietnam.” The core provision of the Paris 
Agreements establishes the GVN and the PRG as “the two South 




THE INDOCHINA WARS fl): VIETNAM 233 


Vietnamese parties,” parallel and equivalent* to move toward unifica¬ 
tion with the North, abrogating the provisional demarcation line, which 
has no political status.Kissinger was attempting to confuse “sove¬ 
reignty of South Vietnam” with “sovereignty within South Vietnam”; 
the latter is what the war “was all about” from the outset, and the 
agreements simply reiterated the position of “the enemy* 5 that this was 
a matter to be settled by the two South Vietnamese parties without 
external interference, as in the October 9-Point Plan.144 

Just as in October, the purpose of this obfuscation was, in Nixon*s 
words, “to make sure that our version of the agreement was the one that 
had great public impact.” And again it succeeded.The media—without 
exception, to our knowledge—accepted the Kissinger-White House 
version as expressing the contents of the agreements, enabling them to 
interpret the PRG-DRV insistence on the actual terms of the Paris 
Agreements as an effort to disrupt them.