Misrepresentation of 
Romero’s views 

As we noted earlier, Romero was unequivocal in laying the blame for 
the violence in El Salvador on the army and security forces, and he 
viewed the left and popular groupings as victims provoked into self- 
defense by violence and injustice.The peoples 5 organizations, he told 
Carter, are “fighting to defend their most fundamental human rights* 5 
against a military establishment that “knows only how to repress the 



54 MANUFACTURING CONSENT 


people and defend the interests of the Salvadorean oligarchy.” And in 
his di^ry, Romero completely repudiated the idea that the army was 
reacting to somebody else’s violence—the security forces are instru¬ 
ments “of a general program of annihilation of those on the left, who 
by themselves would not commit violence or further it were it not for 
social injustice that they want to do away with.” 33 Thus Joseph 
Treasteris statement on the front page of the New York Times that 
Romero “had criticized both the extreme right and the extreme left for 
widespread killing and torture in El Salvador” (Mar.31, 1980) is 
straightforward lying: Romero never accused the left of torture or 
widespread killing, he never equated the right and the left, and he was 
quite clear that the government (an agent of the right) was the primary 
killer.In this respect, Romero’s perception, essentially the same as that 
privately conveyed to the press by the U.S. government, was grossly 
falsified in public by both the government and press.34 

Interestingly, a year later, in an article marking the anniversary of 
the assassination of Archbishop Romero, Edward Schumacher, of the 
Times, noted that under Romero’s successor.