102 But the truth plainly would not have served the purposes of 
this exercise.103 

Perhaps there was some other example of this “fervent and frequent” 
expression of skepticism that silenced the West.Shawcross is wise to 
avoid examples, because as he knows well, his primary source, Pon- 
chaud, went out of his way to praise Chomsky for “the responsible 
attitude and precision of thought” shown in what he had written on 
Cambodia, referring to our 1977 review of his book cited earlier and 
unpublished correspondence he had seen, which exhausts anything 
relevant that appears during the DK period.104 So Shawcross would 
have us believe that a single 1977 article in The Nation silenced the 
West, an article in which, furthermore, we praised the book written by 
his primary source, Ponchaud, as “serious and worth reading,” with its 
“grisly account of what refugees have reported to him about the bar¬ 
barity of their treatment at the hands of the Khmer Rouge,” and stated 
that we are in no position to draw any conclusion about the actual 
extent of the atrocities, in conformity to State Department specialists 
and other informed sources at the time.To be clear, in our one article, to which Ponchaud alludes, we did 



THE INDOCHINA WARS (l I): LAOS AND CAMBODIA 29I 


express some “skepticism*” not only about claims that had already been 
withdrawn as fabrications but also about others that remained to be 
assessed* Thus in reviewing Ponchaud, we expressed skepticism about 
his estimate of casualties caused by American bombing* which appeared 
to us excessive and possibly based on misinterpretation of figures he 
cited; and we raised questions about some of the quotes attributed to 
the Khmer Rouge on which he (and later others) crucially relied, but 
which he had presented in very different forms on different occasions— 
and which he later conceded to have no basis whatsoever.