.The "story 5 was now the negotiations, not the 
fighting,” Northshield explained, adding that “combat stories seemed 
like a contradiction and would confuse the audience,” “ Similar deci¬ 
sions were made at the other networks,” Epstein adds, as all “altered 
their coverage in late 1969 from combat pieces to stories about the 
"Vietnamization J of the war” and the negotiations in Paris.The post- 
Tet accelerated pacification campaign* one of the most crucial and 
murderous operations in the U.S. war against South Vietnam, received 
little attention, 

Epstein believes that “there is a marked difference between the 
coverage of the formative years of the war {1962-1967) and the later 
years (when the antiwar movement was at its height).” “Up until 1968, 
television coverage was controlled to a large extent by the American 
military, and generally it reflected a controlled American initiative 
which seemed to be winning the countryside and decimating the Viet- 
cong.The searchlight rarely focused on related questions, such as the 
sufferings of Vietnamese civilians.” During the Tet offensive, the focus 
changed to Americans “shown on the defensive, endangered and help¬ 
lessly frustrated,” then to “the story of the American withdrawal” as 
""negotiations began at the end of 1968.” The differences, however, are 
misleading.Apart from the live coverage during the Tet offensive, there 
is very little departure from the principle that the war must be viewed 
from the standpoint determined by official Washington doctrine—a 
standpoint that broadened in scope after Tet, as tactical disagreements 
arose within elite circles.