A spokesman for 
the Sihanoukist National Army in Bangkok comments that “The main 
problem we now have is how to get the Vietnamese to pull out without 
bringing back the Khmer Rouge*” the probable consequence of U.S. 
policy.Former Assistant Secretary of State Richard Holbrooke com¬ 
ments that the U.S. aid “will end up going to Pol Pot and his people*” 
a fact noted also by several journalists.Sydney Schanberg’s Cambodian 
associate Dith Fran, whose story of suffering under DK terror was the 
basis for the widely publicized film The Killing Fields and much media 
commentary* found somewhat greater difficulty in reaching the public 
with his view that “Giving U.S. weapons [to the Khmer resistance] is 
like putting gasoline on a fire*” and is the last thing Cambodia needs.David Hawk alleges that “it is common knowledge that Reagan- 
administration political officers and defence attaches from the US Em¬ 
bassy in Bangkok have visited Khmer Rouge enclaves.” 93 

The reasons for supporting the Thai-based DK coalition go beyond 



THE INDOCHINA WARS (ll): LAOS AND CAMBODIA 287 


their “continuity” with the Khmer Rouge regime, A more fundamental 
reason was outlined by our ally Deng Xiaoping in 1979: “It is wise to 
force the Vietnamese to stay in Kampuchea because that way they will 
suffer more and more and will not be able to extend their hand to 
Thailand, Malaysia, and Singapore.” 94 This motive of “bleeding Viet¬ 
nam” to ensure that it does not recover from its victimization at the 
hands of the West has additional advantages.By acting in such a way 
as to enhance suffering and repression in Indochina, we demonstrate 
retrospectively the “benevolence” of our “noble crusade” of earlier 
years.