Perhaps this is an obvious point, but the democratic postulate is that 
the media are independent and committed to discovering and reporting 
the truth, and that they do not merely reflect the world as powerful 
groups wish it to be perceived.Leaders of the media claim that their 
news choices rest on unbiased professional and objective criteria, and 
they have support for this contention in the intellectual community.2 
If, however, the powerful are able to fix the premises of discourse, to 
decide what the general populace is allowed to see, hear, and think 
about, and to “manage” public opinion by regular propaganda cam¬ 
paigns, the standard view of how the system works is at serious odds 
with reality, 3 

The special importance of propaganda in what Walter Lippmann 
referred to as the “manufacture of consent” has long been recognized 
by writers on public opinion, propaganda, and the political require¬ 
ments of social order.4 Lippmann himself, writing in the early 1920s, 
claimed that propaganda had already become “a regular organ of popu¬ 
lar government,” and was steadily increasing in sophistication and im¬ 
portance, 5 We do not contend that this is all the mass media do, but 
we believe the propaganda function to be a very important aspect of 
their overall service.In the first chapter we spell out a propaganda 
model, which describes the forces that cause the mass media to play a 




lx PREFACE 


propaganda role, the processes whereby they mobilize bias, and the 
patterns of news choices that ensue* In the succeeding chapters we try 
to demonstrate the applicability of the propaganda model to the actual 
performance of the media* 

Institutional critiques such as we present in this book are commonly 
dismissed by establishment commentators as “conspiracy theories,” but 
this is merely an evasion.