The Socialist Workers party, a legal 
political party* represents no powerful interests.Therefore, there was 
no scandal when it was revealed, just as passions over Watergate 
reached their zenith* that the FBI had been disrupting its activities by 
illegal break-ins and other measures for a decade, a violation of demo¬ 
cratic principle far more extensive and serious than anything charged 
during the Watergate hearings* What is more* these actions of the 
national political police were only one element of government programs 
extending over many administrations to deter independent political 
action* stir up violence in the ghettos* and undermine the popular 
movements that were beginning to engage sectors of the generally 
marginalized public in the arena of decision-making.2 These coven and 
illegal programs were revealed in court cases and elsewhere during the 
Watergate period, but they never entered the congressional proceedings 




300 manufacturing consent 


and received only limited media attention.Even the complicity of the 
FBI in the police assassination of a Black Panther organizer in Chicago 
was not a scandal* in marked contrast to Nixon’s “enemies list,” which 
identified powerful people who were denigrated in private but suffered 
no consequences.As we have noted, the U.S. role in initiating and 
carrying out the first phase of "the decade of the genocide” in Cam¬ 
bodia entered the Watergate proceedings only marginally: not because 
hundreds of thousands of Cambodians were slaughtered in the course 
of a major war crime, but because Congress was not properly notified, 
so that its privileges were infringed, and even this was considered too 
slight an infraction to enter the final charges.