the particles are mobile, and even incapable of rest, but their 
activity is weak, without effect; when they are distilled, nothing 
remains in the alembic but an insipid phlegm. Do not acid 
vapors have the very properties of melancholia, whereas alcoholic 
vapors, always ready to burst into flame, suggest frenzy; and 
sulfurous vapors, agitated by a violent and continuous movement, 
indicate mania? If, then, one were to seek “the formal reason and 
the causes” of melancholia, one would consider the vapors that 
rise from the blood to the brain and that have degenerated into 
an acid and corrosive vapor. In appearance, it is a melancholia of 


133 


the spirits, a chemistry of the humors that oriented Willis’s 
analysis; but in fact, the principal clue is afforded by the 
immediate qualities of melancholic suffering: an impotent 
disorder, and then that shadow over the mind, along with that 
acid bitterness which corrodes thought and feeling alike. The 
chemistry of acids is not the explanation of the symptoms; it is a 
qualitative option: a phenomenology of melancholic experience. 

Some seventy years later, animal spirits lost their scientific 
prestige. Now it was from the body’s liquid and solid elements 
that the secret of disease was sought. The Medical Dictionary 
which Robert James published in England in 1743 proposes, 
under Mania , a comparative etiology of that disease and of 
melancholia: “It is evident that the brain is the seat ... of all 
diseases of this nature.... It is there that the Creator has fixed, 
although in a manner which is inconceivable, the lodging of the 
soul, the mind, genius, imagination, memory, and all sensations. 
... All these noble functions will be changed, depraved, 
diminished, and totally destroyed, if the blood and the humors 
corrupted in quality and quantity are no longer carried to the 
brain in a uniform and temperate manner, but instead circulate 
there with violence and impetuosity, or move about slowly, with 
difficulty or with languor.” It is this languishing flow, these 
choked vessels, this heavy, clogged blood that the heart labors to 
distribute throughout the organism, and which has difficulty 
penetrating into the very fine arterioles of the brain, where the 
circulation ought to be very rapid in order to maintain the 
movement of thought—it is all this distressing obstruction which 
explains melancholia. Heaviness, encumbrance—here again the 
primitive qualities guide analysis. The explanation becomes a 
transfer to the organism of qualities perceived in the condition, 
the conduct, the words of the sick person. We move from 
qualitative apprehension to supposed explanation. But it is this 
apprehension that continues to prevail and always wins out over 
theoretical coherence. Anne-Charles Lorry juxtaposes the two 
