The indigent and the old “have 
before their eyes nothing but chains, bars, and bolts.Add to this 
the groans of the prisoners that sometimes reach them....It is on 
this basis that I urgently ask either that the prisoners be removed 
from Bicetre, leaving only the indigent there, or that the indigent 
be removed, leaving only the prisoners.” And here, finally, is the 
decisive point, if we remember that this letter was written in the 
middle of the Revolution, long before the reports of Georges 
Cabanis, and several months after Pinel, according to tradition, 
had “liberated” the insane of Bicetre: “We could perhaps in this 
latter case leave the madmen there, another class of unfortunates 
who cause horrible suffering to humanity.... Make haste, then, 
citizens who cherish humanity, to realize such a beautiful dream, 
and be persuaded in advance that you will thereupon have 


250 



deserved well of it.” So great was the confusion of those years; so 
difficult was it, at the moment when “humanity” was being re¬ 
evaluated, to determine the place madness was to occupy within 
it; so difficult was it to situate madness in a social sphere that was 
being restructured.251 



IX 



252 


THE BIRTH OF 
THE ASYLUM 


WE know the images.They are familiar in all histories of 
psychiatry, where their function is to illustrate that happy age 
when madness was finally recognized and treated according to a 
truth to which we had too long remained blind.