In the time of Pinel and Tuke, this power had nothing 
extraordinary about it; it was explained and demonstrated in the 
efficacity, simply, of moral behavior; it was no more mysterious 


284 



than the power of the eighteenth-century doctor when he diluted 
fluids or relaxed fibers.But very soon the meaning of this moral 
practice escaped the physician, to the very extent that he 
enclosed his knowledge in the norms of positivism: from the 
beginning of the nineteenth century, the psychiatrist no longer 
quite knew what was the nature of the power he had inherited 
from the great reformers, and whose efficacity seemed so foreign 
to his idea of mental illness and to the practice of all other 
doctors.This psychiatric practice, mysterious even to those who used 
it, is very important in the situation of the madman within the 
medical world.First because medicine of the mind for the first 
time in the history of Western science was to assume almost 
complete autonomy: from the time of the Greeks, it had been no 
more than a chapter of medicine, and we have seen Willis study 
madness under the rubric “diseases of the head”; after Pinel and 
Tuke, psychiatry would become a medicine of a particular style: 
those most eager to discover the origin of madness in organic 
causes or in hereditary dispositions would not be able to avoid 
this style.They would be all the more unable to avoid it in that 
this particular style—bringing into play increasingly obscure 
moral powers—would originally be a sort of bad conscience; they 
would increasingly confine themselves in positivism, the more 
they felt their practice slipping out of it.