On 
the contrary, they apply correctly the most rigorous figures of 
logic.And Paul Zacchias has no difficulty finding them, in all 
their rigor, among the insane.Syllogism, in a man letting himself 
starve to death: “The dead do not eat; I am dead; hence I do not 
eat.” Induction extended to infinity, in a man suffering from 
persecution delusions: “A, B, and C are my enemies; all of them 
are men; therefore all men are my enemies.” Enthymeme, in 
another sufferer: “Most of those who have lived in this house are 
dead, hence I, who have lived in this house, am dead.” The 
marvelous logic of the mad which seems to mock that of the 
logicians because it resembles it so exactly, or rather because it is 
exactly the same, and because at the secret heart of madness, at 
the core of so many errors, so many absurdities, so many words 
and gestures without consequence, we discover, finally, the 
hidden perfection of a language.“From these things,” Zacchias 
concludes, “you truly see how best to discuss the intellect.” The 
ultimate language of madness is that of reason, but the language 
of reason enveloped in the prestige of the image, limited to the 
locus of appearance which the image defines.It forms, outside 
the totality of images and the universality of discourse, an 
abusive, singular organization whose insistent quality constitutes 


105 



madness.